Gentlemen for being here with us today,
and I open it up to you to invite, uh,
to make some opening interrupting remarks.
Uh, thank you Prime Minister, uh,
afternoon committee members.
Uh, thanks for the opportunity
to provide an update on the work of the GCSB.
I have a few opening comments to offer,
and then I'll hand to, uh, Andrew
for some New Zealand SIS comments,
and then we're happy to take any, any questions.
Great, thank you guys. Uh, starting globally.
Over the past year, the volatile Geostrategic environment
and the rapid pace
of disruptive technologies have been key factors shaping our
core business, which is delivering signals intelligence
and building cyber resilience.
For New Zealand, that unpredictability is,
it's effectively moving the goalposts of
what resilience looks like,
and it requires a more proactive approach to detecting
and disrupting threats and close cooperation with others.
In this changing environment, we've, uh,
provided intelligence relating to terrorist activity
and to foreign state activity where
that could threaten the safety of New Zealanders
and international partners.
Conflict intentions have sometimes arisen
with little notice, and this week's major conflict in the
Middle East is no exception.
And our team has been providing round the clock threat
intelligence updates to our customers, especially
to the NZDF and closer to home.
We provided intelligence about geostrategic
and military activity that affects the security
of our region and New Zealand more directly.
We also boosted our impact on transnational organized crime
in the Pacific through a dedicated mission under Operation
Kiwi with customs and the NZDF
and in close cooperation with regional partners.
And just this year, it's already led into the seizure
of several tons of narcotics at sea.
Domestically, we supported agencies including the
New Zealand SIS
and their efforts to counter terrorists activity
and foreign interference.
Turning to cybersecurity, the geostrategic environment
and the pace of technology are again,
key factors shaping our cyber threat scape.
The National Cybersecurity Center
recently highlighted five key themes
of New Zealand's current environment.
First, that foreign state sponsored actors continue
to be active and targeting our country's networks.
Second, that cyber criminals are accessing technologies
that allow them to essentially commercialize their
activities at a greater scale.
Third, that issues motivated hacktivists
are targeting New Zealand organizations,
including a byproduct of global conflicts.
Fourth, that cyber threat actors are increasingly targeting
organizations through their supply chains.
And finally, but importantly, it is known weaknesses
and unpatched vulnerabilities in organizations, networks
that continue to provide threat actors with easy access.
In many cases in recent New Zealand cyber incidents,
including the attacks on manage my health
and medimap, uh, fit within those themes.
While the NCSC uses several tools to detect
and defeat threats, including cortex
and also, uh, malware free networks,
which recently clicked over 1 billion disruptions of threats
to the country's networks, these tools are having to adapt
as technologies and threats change.
Of course, we have never been a national firewall,
and so everyone in the national cybersecurity
ecosystem has a part to play.
Over the past year, we've strengthened our engagement
with critical infrastructure providers
who are becoming higher profile
targets for malicious actors.
Consultation with these key organizations is now underway
about potential cybersecurity regulation.
We're also increasing our outreach to South Pacific partners
to help lift cyber resilience across the region.
In terms of our own resilience, I'm pleased
to advise the committee that in June, the new, uh, all
of government data center named MATA
was opened at NUI in Auckland on the financial front.
GCSB has been managing sustainably within its budget,
largely absorbing cost pressures to date.
Although I do note the competition
for talent is getting stronger.
Looking ahead, the rapid pace
of technology development is going
to present both security challenges and opportunities.
We're already seeing that with ai,
but I expect it to happen also in the areas
of quantum computing and cryptography.
Some shifts may be hard to predict
and could occur at short notice, meaning that, uh,
we may have to adapt quickly.
So being both proactive
and agile is going to be important in that environment.
Collaborative problem solving
with our close international partners will make all the
difference, uh, as of course will talented people at GCSB
that I'm very fortunate to lead.
I'll now hand over to Andrew.
Um, thank you, Andrew.
I thank you for the opportunity to talk with you today.
Almost three months on from the horrific
terrorist attack on Bondi Beach on 14 December.
Our thoughts are very much
with the Jewish communities on both sides of the Tasman.
At the N-Z-S-I-S, we immediately stood up an operation
to understand how the Bondi attack
might impact the New Zealand threat environment.
We also provided support as required to our Australian
and to our New Zealand police colleagues.
The operation ran right through the summer break,
and we continue to receive relevant intelligence.
The N-Z-S-I-S is also monitoring the unfolding situation in
Iran and the potential impact on our local
threat environment.
We do not see any change to the current threat profile,
although it is still early days.
The Bondi attack has unfortunately resonated
with violent extremists from across
the ideological spectrum.
Faith-based extremist organizations like ISIS
and Al-Qaeda paid close attention,
so too did identity based violent extremists
who freely promote vile, antisemitic,
and Islamic phobic narratives.
The Bondi attack also helped to feed
and motivate anti-immigration narratives that are used
by some politically motivated violent extremists.
Another concerning dimension was the use of AI to falsify
and, um, spread online content about the attack.
We were all shocked and appalled
by the senseless attack at Bondi,
but unfortunately, I was not completely surprised.
This is the type of low capability without warning attack.
The N-Z-S-A-S frequently warns could happen here
that could come from violent extremists from across the
ideological spectrum.
The Combined Threat Assessment Group
inside N-Z-S-I-S has recently updated the descriptors used
for the national terrorism threat level to better reflect
the nature of the threat environment.
A terrorist attack remains a realistic possibility in
New Zealand that is now reflected on the scale
as possible rather than low
as the level was previously described.
Using the term possible is intended
to focus minds on the need to be prepared.
Both anti sem, both anti-Semitism
and Islamophobia are diseases we see running
through the violent extremist environment in New Zealand.
Often alongside other dark motivations,
new Zealanders should be alert that it is possible someone
with extreme antisemitic Islamic phobic views
may develop the intent and capability to conduct an attack.
Faith-based and ethnic communities feel this threat deeply
and are increasingly concerned
with the level of hate they face.
I heard these concerns firsthand in my engagement
with the Jewish and Muslim communities in just the month
before the Bondi attack.
While my agency
and police are very focused on detecting violent extremists,
we are not all seen and all known, and
nor should we be in a democracy like ours.
New Zealanders are just as likely to see
concerning behavior as we are.
The right thing to do is to report that behavior
to us or to the police.
The broader domestic threat environment also presents a
range of challenges including foreign interference,
espionage, and insiders within organizations who wittingly
or unwittingly can harm our national security.
The N-Z-S-I-S is intensifying efforts
to promote a stronger security mindset across a board range
of sectors in our society, including
through our annual security threat environment report,
new Zealand's relationships, our innovation,
our location in the South Pacific
and our close proximity to Antarctica,
all make New Zealand geo strategically significant.
This has been positive
for New Zealand's international reputation
and our economic prosperity,
but that geostrategic significance also brings
with it some downstream threats to our national security.
There continues to be a number of states
that conduct foreign interference in
espionage in New Zealand.
This is not benign activity.
Such actors have a voracious appetite for covert influence
and non-public information that they can leverage
to gain an advantage over us and our partners.
For example, increasingly we see influential New Zealanders
or people with access to
privileged information being targeted
by foreign intelligence services
through deceptive online recruitment.
Certain states also want us to line up
with their talking points and ensure our communities
and civil society don't speak out of turn.
Deception, coercion
and corruption are frequently used
to further their goals in ways that are contrary
to our national interest.
The fact that we now have criminal offenses
for such activities reinforces that foreign interference
and espionage is unacceptable In New Zealand.
The N-Z-S-I-S continues
to have success disrupting foreign interference
and espionage activity,
but what we see may just be the tip of the iceberg.
As always, prevention will be the best defense,
and there is much that organizations
and communities can do to manage the risk.
We have some excellent advice and guidance,
but leaders of organizations, businesses
and communities also need to take steps
to protect their people,
their critical information and their assets.
Um, finally, I'd like to acknowledge, um,
the extraordinary professionalism
and dedication shown by the people of, uh, N-Z-S-I-S
who I'm proud to lead every day.
Um, prime Minister, minister Collins, um,
you both had the opportunity over the past year to see
up close impressive work they do.
And Minister Collins, on behalf of both agencies, we'd like
to thank you for the leadership and support you have
provided to our two agencies as our minister over the last,
um, two and a bit views.
Um, thank you. We're now happy to take questions.
Well, thank you gentlemen, and thank you.
Um, uh, again, we joined all of us here
and thank the people that are working in your
Organizations. I appreciate
those opening remarks.
Um, we're gonna open it up to the floor.
We need to close by 4 55.
Can I just lead off and then I'll pass
to Chris and then to Priyanka.
Um, what, what is the level of maturity in GCSB question?
So what is the level of maturity that you're observing
around cybersecurity across New Zealand,
and how do you think we are placed with respect
to critical infrastructure?
And even maybe a quick comment on public service.
Yeah. Uh, thanks, prime Minister.
Um, the, I would describe across New Zealand as
as highly variable.
Um, uh, we have some, uh, pockets
of excellent cybersecurity, um,
and including in some of, um, our most
critical critical infrastructure in the areas that we would,
uh, we would hope to have it.
Yeah. Uh, unfortunately there are, um,
there are also pockets,
including in our critical infrastructure, uh, where
that cybersecurity is barely meeting a, a foundational, uh,
level that, that we would expect in the public sector.
Uh, we've seen the level of cybersecurity maturity continue
to, to lift, um, but the bad guys always try
and find the weakest point to attack next.
And currently what we're seeing is that that is
through supply chains, including digital supply chains.
So what we're now having to pay more attention to is some
of those, uh, contracted suppliers, for example,
to the public sector,
and make sure that the level of cybersecurity maturity
that they're providing is what we would expect
for the public sector itself.
Yes. Uh, just in terms of, uh,
critical infrastructure providers, I'll just note
that the consultation
with critical infrastructure organizations started, uh,
just last week, uh, in terms of
what more formal expectations might look like
around cybersecurity standards setting. Yeah.
Excellent, Chris. Mm-hmm. Thank you.
Um, Andrew Hampton, I, I guess, uh, any members
of the public watching this on the live stream,
hearing your comments around the sort of direct level
to New Zealand would probably be quite alarmed
and maybe scared by some of the comments
that, that you have made.
And I think it's probably speaks
to a wider anxiety about the state of the world
that many people will be feeling at the moment.
My question to you would be,
what are you asking New Zealanders to do
with that information?
Yeah, because, uh, if you are listening in and,
and this is the first thing you are hearing, this,
you will be scared by what you've just said.
Yeah. So what are you asking people
to do do with that information?
Um, thank you, Mr. Hopkins.
Firstly, um, our intention is never to alarm people.
It's to alert them to the risk,
but also to help point them in the direction of
what steps they, they can take.
Um, as a result of a range of factors,
the global environment increased polarization online,
um, more young people engaging
with violent content online means that the environment
that we are facing certainly has more
complexity than we've had before.
You know, there's a range of different motivations.
There's people shopping between,
between different motivations,
and there's also the, um, ability for people
to go quite a long way down that radicalization path
by just engaging on a computer.
So that is concerning.
Um, also concerning,
obviously New Zealand's had two recent terrorist attacks.
We've had their attack and Bondi.
So these, these things do, do happen.
We're not immune to it. So what do we want communities
to do, or all, all citizens to do?
Look, the first thing is to, um,
just be aware of the signs
that someone may be vulnerable
or on a pathway to, to radicalization.
What we've found through looking at cases is
as often their signs are, they're quite, quite early, um,
particularly with people's online behavior,
but also engaging in those types of narratives.
And the earlier organizations like us in place
and the wider social sector become aware of them,
the more options there are to, to do something about it.
So we produced a booklet a few years ago, as you know,
called Know the Signs.
It's available online.
It talks about what some of those signs are.
We're doing a lot of work in the education
sector now around sharing that.
So the first thing is public just to be aware of, you know,
what those concerning behaviors are.
And then they need to have the trust and confidence,
and that's a big part of what we do.
When they see stuff to raise it with us
or the the police, we may be actually able to assess
that there isn't, isn't a risk of that person while, uh, uh,
not a high risk of that person mobilizing
to violence at the same time, it could be the missing part
of a part of a puzzle.
So that's one of the things that I'm keen
to do at a very pragmatic level.
I'm keen for parents to take a stronger interest in
what their kids are looking at online.
I, I've said this before,
but if you, if you look at our current active
investigations, and I've shared with that
with some committee members,
it looks like a year 13 boys school
and the diversity that you would see there,
there's not a single ideology,
there's not a single ethnicity.
But what's common is these are largely people
who are spending a lot of time online engaging
with quite violent, violent content.
Um, unfortunately, they are also often people
who have other vulnerabilities around, um, um, drug
and alcohol and things like that, which reinforces the need
for it to be a all of society approach.
So a long answer there,
but I think the key things be aware it could be happen here.
Be aware of the signs of someone who's could be mobilizing,
tell us about it, but also
keep an eye on what your kids are doing.
I mean, I dunno whether this is a question which,
which Andrew, this is a question four,
but in terms of that online risk for parents, I think
that is something parents are highly
attuned to at the moment.
What steps are you taking to alert parents to the fact that
that risk might not be in places where they think it is?
Yeah, so social media, I think everyone's very attuned to,
but there are video games that kids are playing Yeah.
That are connected, that, that can be used, uh, by those
with a malicious intent.
Yeah. And our parents are aware enough
of those sorts of risks. Look,
Um, we, we can't be be everywhere.
So opportunities like this are valuable to, to raise it.
There is material on our, our website
around what those signs are.
But what we are also doing is partnering with others,
partnering with people in the, um, education sector.
Had an excellent meeting
with the senior team at education recently,
and they point us in the direction of, um, who are the,
um, people who can get those messages out to teachers.
We went with principals. So I think the
education sector is part of it.
Others we've partnered
with though are the disability sector,
because sometimes, um, individuals who
for whatever reason are, are isolated,
spend more time online, may be more vulnerable, um,
are from that sector.
So they have actually taken some of the material
and developed a training program for people in that sector.
So a big part of it's doing that.
The last thing I would say, which we are very pleased about,
because we didn't actually initiate it happens,
but if you buy a, an Xbox in New Zealand,
now the appearance guide includes a link to link to, um,
our guidance guys.
Um, can we go to Priyanka and then Tiana
Or do you wanna go the other way?
Uh, well, I just had a quick set. Yeah.
Um, so I was just sort of interested in your comments
and I wonder if you had one
around misinformation and disinformation.
Um, particularly when you're looking at social media.
Uh, social media platforms as well.
I mean, parents and teachers have gotta sleep,
but algorithms, dope.
Um, so got a look.
Getting work here should be focusing,
You know, our agencies aren't
and shouldn't be the internet place.
You know, we have, we have broad, broad, broad powers
to undertake investigations into people
who could be national security threats.
I think it would be wrong for us
to have some broader role in placing
content on the internet.
We can raise awareness of it.
Um, but there, there are a couple of things I would,
I would say there is, yeah, with without a doubt, um,
the polarizing
and grievance based rhetoric that we see online.
Much of it generated from overseas as driving
people towards fine extremist narratives.
You know, that, that's proven now.
And I think it's bigger than our country.
It's a, it's a global issue.
I think the second thing though,
and you touched on algorithms, they are a factor.
But what we are finding with these young people,
they're actually going looking for this material.
It's not just being pushed at them.
Sometimes they're going looking for it.
And I, I don't, I don't want to lump it all on
parents 'cause I know how hard it can be.
But, um, there's been examples where, you know,
children we've, or young people we've become aware of
or police become aware of, we go
and engage with the parents or the police.
Do we tend not to, the parents had no idea
what their, their kids are up to. Bianca,
Thank you. Um,
my questions are also sort of, um, against the backdrop
of the comments that you made around the terrorism level,
moving from low to possible.
Yeah. You've talked about the need to be prepared.
Um, you've both also mentioned that you maximize your impact
to keep New Zealand safe through different relationships
and networks that you are part of.
Um, I want
to ask you about your involvement in a particular decision.
You'll be aware that at the 21 may meeting
of the National Security Board, um, that the board,
including representation from both your agencies Yeah.
Unanimously recommended that the terrorism designation
of the American Proud Boys be renewed.
Um, you will be aware that there was further advice given,
um, uh, by the CE of DPMC that it not be renewed,
and that was subsequently allowed, um, to, to lapse.
Now, is that change in advice, something that was endorsed
by the National Security Board, including yourselves?
Um, if I, if I go back to the original decision
to designate the Proud Boys in 2022,
um, CT a, the, um, combined Threat Assessment Group,
which is hosted by, um, N-Z-S-A-S,
we didn't strongly support it at that point.
We didn't think they actually met the threshold,
but at that point, the view generally was they should be
recognized when it came around.
This time, we didn't have a strong view either.
We had questions about whether they actually met the,
met the threshold initially when it went up,
but yep, I was part of that decision to endorse it.
The fact is, for me, the proud boys are not a priority
for us in terms of our, our investigations.
So whilst there was that, I was part of that decision that
that went up, um, Ben reviewed it,
he raised some points.
I was comfortable with the points that he raised
because in some ways they were in line with the advice
that CAG had actually given back in 20 20 22.
So as far as you're aware, that did go back
to the National Security Board
for endorsement, that changing?
No, no. It was, Ben is, well, Ben can speak for himself,
but Ben is chair of the National Security Board.
He made the decision, but he advised us of his reasons.
And as I said, I, I know I'm sounding a little bit
ambivalent here, but we didn't necessarily think it was a,
a strongly supported decision.
First time I went around with the second time,
the reality is it's not making much difference
to the New Zealand threat environment
because they aren't, um, subjects for our investigation.
Okay. Uh, the reason I ask that is
because Mr. King did say to a parliamentary select committee
that the board has endorsed that changed he position.
So you would've endorsed that despite police saying
that they are a crypto fascist group
with participation in New Zealand. Yeah.
Look, um, we are now out of the classified, um,
environment where I could be,
this is all in the public domain I know,
but I could talk a bit more around, there was a lot
of debate that my predecessor was in in 2022
about whether they should be recognized.
And she was not strongly supportive of it.
The CT a's advice was not a whole lot had, had, had changed.
So I guess what I'm saying is, yep, I, I was part of
that initial decision,
but I was also comfortable with where it ended up
because we, it ended up, it was probably close
to our original advice.
Either way, it doesn't make much difference to
my work in terms of our investigations
'cause they're, they're not a, a priority focus
for investigations here.
Okay. Brooke? Uh, yes.
Look, I'm quite concerned, I think both
as a government minister and as an indi individual Yeah.
About, um, cybersecurity threats
and, uh, the, I guess the,
the relaxed nature in which some companies are
holding people's data
and not having very secure platforms for
that information being stored.
And I wonder, you know, over where we are, um,
and the year ahead where you would hope to see some
of those New Zealand based companies actually end up,
and do you actually have a plan
or engagements with companies
and businesses to help, you know, increase their,
their privacy and security systems?
Uh, yes. Thank you Minister.
The, uh, so yes, and, and yes.
Um, I think we've already covered off the,
the critical infrastructure question.
So there's a already that, uh, more formal process
to look at how we, uh, set
and enforce cybersecurity standards across,
um, critical infrastructure.
Uh, but of course, many, many organizations are not, uh,
critical infrastructure and many organizations, um, some
of 'em quite small hold, uh,
really sensitive personal information belonging to,
uh, to New Zealanders.
Uh, so as part of the, uh, action plan for the,
the latest national cybersecurity strategy, it was,
uh, recently released.
There's a couple of lines in there that talk about, uh,
the question of, uh, essentially privacy.
Um, because, uh,
because what, in my view, what, uh, is is a,
a missing piece at the moment,
is the right incentives in place, uh, for organizations
that hold highly sensitive data to, uh, to have
what we would expect would be the right levels
of cybersecurity in place to be able to hold
that really sensitive, uh, information.
As we look across some of our like-minded, uh, countries,
uh, nearby in, in Europe and,
and others, uh, we can see that as the,
the goalposts have shifted in cybersecurity expectations,
um, that they have updated some of their settings
and some of those incentives have been put in place.
So under this element of the cybersecurity strategy now, uh,
we will work with other agencies to put up advice on, uh,
what, what we think needs to change in that area.
Mm-hmm.
Good. Um, any other questions?
Yeah, Sorry. Yeah.
Um, um, so yeah, I've been thinking about, uh, you know,
the US Israel struts and Iran,
and, you know, this is a terrifying moment in history
for particularly people in the Middle East,
but also their families here, um, as well.
And, and I wonder if you could provide us some clarity and,
and for people, um, uh, watching us around the, the, the,
the nature of the relationship with Five Ice Partners, uh,
the parameters that you have to operate in, um, uh, I think
that would give more, um, certainty
or clarity for people in terms of the role that you play,
uh, in terms of that, uh, certainly for some of us on
outside of the house, the relationship, uh, the close,
the potential closeness
with the Israel in particular is, is problematic.
And so maybe you could explain using that moment as a,
as an example of, of your role. Um, in this,
Maybe I'll just talk very generally about the intelligence
sharing relationship we have within the,
and then I'll hand over to Andrew to talk specifically, um,
about current events.
Look, um,
New Zealand gets significant benefit from a range
of intelligence relationships.
Five eyes in particular.
We receive indispensable intelligence
and technical advice that we just couldn't get,
um, from anyone else.
The key point we want to emphasize though, is the engagement
that New Zealand has with our international
partners is on our own terms.
We, um, cannot ask them
to do anything we couldn't legally do
ourselves and vice versa.
There are clear policies
and processes in place to ensure that everything all sharing
or cooperation is done in accordance with New Zealand law,
including human rights, um, requirements.
We need to, um,
do regular human rights assessments of all parties
who we cooperate with, including our Five Eyes
partners in order to to, to work with them.
So yes, we have, um,
a need to be vigilant to get the benefit of
that intelligence sharing relationship,
but in a way that does not compromise New Zealand's law
or law or values.
And I'll hand to Andrew, who it's a very real thing
for him as a second agency.
Uh, yes. Uh, thanks Mr. Tian.
Ano, um, as a second sharing agency, we are, we are sharing,
uh, intelligence every day of every week with our,
with our Five Eyes Partners.
Um, uh, the intelligence value for New Zealand is, is, uh,
really significant, um, from, um,
intelligence about threats to cyber threats
to New Zealand's, uh, networks, uh, to terrorists threats,
um, uh, to organize organized crime.
Uh, we get a a lot out of that.
Um, but there are important, uh,
provisions built into the machinery
and around five eyes, uh, shearing.
Uh, and that is that, um, uh, we have good control
around, uh, whether intelligence, uh, uh,
to withhold intelligence, um, when it,
uh, might compromise New Zealand's own legal, uh, settings,
our own, uh, human rights settings, uh,
our own policy settings.
And so not everything is shared, uh, all the time,
and that is part of the machinery of, of Five Eyes.
And I think that's one of the why, one of the reasons
that actually it can continues to, to endure, um,
because it has those safeguards, uh, built into it.
Um, and that includes even, uh, where one
of the partners might want to share some of our intelligence
with another partner outside of the, the Five Eyes.
Those same, uh, controls and settings and provisions apply.
Uh, and we will, we will do the consideration, uh,
of whether those requests, um,
meet New Zealand's own, own settings or not.
And of course, we have an independent inspector general
who gets to see everything that we do.
He has taken a, a strong interest in our cooperation with,
um, international partners.
He, he has it under, under constant, um, constant review.
Um, and so that's an extra check for, um,
for New Zealanders as well.
And, and just a quick follow up and,
and will that follow through with the data center,
the ma data center as well?
Uh, and I, I mean, I sort of get the ease
with interoperability, but then it can come with some
of these, um, challenges that you've described.
Yes. You know, that is a sovereign, uh, capability, uh,
for us and also comes within the
purview of the Inspector General.
Okay. Well, uh, gentlemen,
can I just say thank you very much for, um,
uh, engaging with us today.
Really appreciate it. Uh,
we're gonna conclude the questioning now.
Um, the public, the recording will, uh, conclude as well.
Um, the session will return to private,
and if I can ask everybody to leave the room,
that would be great.